---
alias: escape from darkness
TextType: section
Book: ACIM
ChapterNumber: 1
SectionNumber: 4
Reference: T-1.IV
tags: darkness, miracles

---
## T-1.IV. The Escape From Darkness


==&#8592 Previous Section==  [[T-1.III. Atonement and Miracles]]
==&#8594Next Section &#8594== [[T-1.V Wholeness and Spirit]]
***
###### T-1.IV.1
The [[escape]] from [[darkness]] involves two [[stages]]: First, the recognition that darkness cannot hide. This step usually entails [[fear]]. Second, the recognition that there is nothing you want to hide even if you could. This step brings escape from fear. When you have become willing to hide nothing, you will not only be willing to enter into [[communion]] but will also understand [[peace]] and [[Joy]].

###### T-1.IV.2
[[Holiness]] can never be really hidden in darkness, but you can deceive yourself about it. This [[deception]] makes you [[fearful]] because you realise in your [[heart]] it _is_ a deception, and you exert enormous efforts to establish its reality. The [[miracle|miracles]] sets reality where it belongs. Reality belongs only to spirit, and the [[miracle|miracles]] acknowledges only truth. It thus dispels illusions about yourself, and puts you in communion with yourself and God. The [[miracle|miracles]] joins in the [[Atonement]] by placing the mind in the service of the Holy Spirit. This establishes the proper function of the mind and corrects its errors, which are merely lacks of love. Your mind can be possessed by illusions, but spirit is eternally free. If a ind perceives without love, it perceives an empty shell and is unaware of the spirit within. But the Atonement restores spirit to its proper place. The mind that serves spirit _is_ invulnerable.

###### T-1.IV.3
Darkness is lack of light as sin is [[lack of love]]. It has no unique [[properties]] of its own. It is an [[example]] of the "scarcity" belief, from which only error can proceed. Truth is always [[abundant]]. Those who perceive and acknowledge that they have everything have no needs of any kind. The purpose of the Atonement is to restore everything to you: or rather, to restore it to your awareness. You were given everything when you were created, just as everyone was. ^818cee

###### T-1.IV.4
The [[emptiness]] engendered by fear must be replaced by [[Forgiveness]]. That is what the [[Bible]] means by "There is no death" and why I could demonstrate that [[death]] does not exist. I came to fulfil the law by reinterpreting it. The law itself, if properly understood, offers only [[protection]]. It is those who have not yet changed their minds who brought the "hell-fire" concept into it. I assure you that I will witness for anyone who lets me, and to whatever extent he permits it. Your witnessing demonstrates your belief, and thus strengthens it. Those who witness for me are expressing, through their [[miracle|miracles]], that they have abandoned the belief in deprivation in favour of the abundance they have learned belongs to them.

***
==&#8592 Previous Section==  [[T-1.III. Atonement and Miracles]]
==&#8594Next Section &#8594== [[T-1.V Wholeness and Spirit]]