alias:: my writing method in Logseq
tags:: #RRW #TLDR #myWriting #workflow 
project:: #[[Metamechanic Mycelium]] #[[workflow]] #allProjects #[[The Metamechanic]] 
see-also:: #[[block writing]] #[[Andy Matuschak]] #[[holonic writing]] #[[digital garden]]

-
- Writing in Logseq
	- Why?
	- How?
		- Page embeds to one-level below.
		- Long-form writing: smallest block is a section.
		- Block writing
		- Disambiguation of titles (since each note should have a unique name)
	- What?
	- What next?
- Writing in Obsidian
	- Folder structure
	- Long-form
		- refers to other articles, blogs - easy
		- refers to index cards, datatables, nuggets
	- Split-screen; mulitple panels
	- Collapsible sub-headings
	- Table of Contents
- Questions
	- How to mirror developments in one platform in the other, in an appropriate way
	- What exactly should be mirrored?
		- Not every note that gets updated should be mirrored
- Needs
	- note types
	- note phases
- Tag heavily
  collapsed:: true
	- update [[Metamechanic ontology]] routinely
- Write pages as short blocks then 'page embed' or 'block embed' so I can fold them #[[block writing]]
- Don't make pages too long
	- what is the guidance here?
	- Pages often should have 1 sub-level max. This allows for more efficient page embedding
	- Where is the length limit?
		- Single bullet point/node like Tana is too short
		- Long-form (like Obsidian) is not the style I'm after either
- Ask myself at each point: what is the smallest block that will make sense by itself?
	- {{embed ((678ae851-1659-4b1a-9a22-8d821a32df1f))}}
- Answer questions
	- Have a clear research question and sub-questions for each task
	- Write to these questions
- Use markdown headings
- What are the types of block that can be written? 
  Can all (non-fiction) writing be broken down to types of argumentative structures?
	- Claim, counter-claim
	- fact, data
	- qualification (as in conditions, )
	- Example, evidence; or should
	- Premise, assumption, axiom, assertion
	- Relationships
		- Degree of agreement
		- Elaboration, expansion
		- Evidence, Example
- A block should be a paragraph with a summary sentence as heading
	- TEXAS paragraph? TEXEXAS
- Blocks require metadata