---
alias: faith belief and vision,
TextType: section
Book: ACIM
ChapterNumber: 21
SectionNumber: 3
Reference: T-21.III
language: en
---
## T-21.III. Faith, Belief and Vision

==&#8592 Previous Section== [[T-21.II. The Responsibility for Sight]]
==&#8594 Next Section &#8594== [[T-21.IV. The Fear to Look Within]]

***
###### T-21.III.1
All [[special relationship|special relationships]] have [[sin]] as their [[goal]]. For they are [[bargain|bargains]] with reality, toward which the seeming union is adjusted. Forget not this; to bargain is to set a [[limits|limit]], and any brother with whom you have a limited relationship, you hate. You may attempt to keep the bargain in the name of "fairness," sometimes demanding [[pay|payment]] of yourself, perhaps more often of the other. Thus in the "fairness" you attempt to ease the guilt that comes from the accepted purpose of the relationship. And that is why the Holy Spirit must change its purpose to make it useful to Him and harmless to you.

###### T-21.III.2
If you accept this change, you have accepted the idea of making room for truth. The _source_ of sin is gone. You may imagine that you still experience its effects, but it is not your purpose and you no longer want it. No one allows a purpose to be replaced while he desires it, for nothing is so cherished and protected as is a goal the mind accepts. This it will follow, grimly or happily, but always with faith and with the persistence that faith inevitably brings. The power of faith is never recognized if it is placed in sin. But it is always recognized if it is placed in love.

###### T-21.III.3
Why is it strange to you that faith can move mountains? This is indeed a little feat for such a power. For faith can keep the Son of God in chains as long as he believes he is in chains. And when he is released from the it will be simply because he no longer believes in the, withdrawing faith that they can hold him, and placing it in his freedom instead. It is impossible to place equal faith in opposite directions. What faith you give to sin your take away from holiness. And what you offer holiness has been removed from sin. ^40a791

###### T-21.III.4
Faith and belief and vision are the means by which the goal of holiness is reached. Through them the Holy Spirit leads you to the real world, and away from all illusions where your faith was laid. This is His Direction; the only one He ever sees. And when you wander, He reminds you there is but one. His faith and His belief and vision are al for you. And when you have accepted them completely instead of yours, you will have need of them no longer. For faith and vision and belief are meaningful only before the state of certainty is reached. In [[Heaven]] they are unknown. Yet Heaven is reached through them.

###### T-21.III.5
It is impossible that the Son of God lack faith, but he can choose where he would have it be. [[faithlessness]] is not a lack of faith, but faith in nothing. Faith given to [[illusion|illusions]] does not lack [[power]], for by it does the Son of God believe that he is powerless. Thus is he faithless to himself, but strong in faith in his illusions about himself. For faith, perception and belief you made, as means for losing certainty and finding sin. This mad direction was your choice, and by your faith in what you chose, you made what you desired.

###### T-21.III.6
The [[Holy Spirit]] has a use for all the means for sin by which you sought to find it. But as He uses them they lead away from sin, because His purpose lies in the opposite direction. He sees the means you use, but not the purpose for which you made them. He would not take them from you, for He sees their value as a means for what He wills for you. You made perception that you might choose among your brothers, and seek for sin with them. The Holy Spirit sees perception as a means to teach you that the vision of a holy relationship is all you _want_ to see. Then will you give your faith to holiness, desiring and believing in it because of your desire.

###### T-21.III.7
Faith and belief become attached to vision, as all the means that once served sin are redirected now toward holiness. For what you think is sin is limitation, and whom you try to limit to the body you hate because you fear. In your refusal to forgive him, you would condemn him to the body because the means for sin are dear to you. And so the body has your faith and your belief. But holiness would set your brother free, removing hatred by removing fear, not as a [[symptom]], but at its source.

###### T-21.III.8
Those who would free their brothers from the body can have no fear. They have [[renounced]] the means for sin by choosing to let all limitations be removed. As they desire to look upon their brothers in holiness, the power of their belief and faith sees far beyond the body, supporting vision, not obstructing it. But first they chose to recognize how much their faith had limited their understanding of the world, desiring to place its power elsewhere should another point of view by given them. The miracles that follow this decision are also born of faith. For all who choose to look away from sin are given vision, and are led to holiness.

###### T-21.III.9
Those who believe in sin must think the Holy Spirit asks for [[sacrifice]], for this is how they think _their_ purpose is accomplished. Brother, the Holy Spirit knows that sacrifice brings nothing. He makes no [[bargain|bargains]]. And if you seek to limit Him, you will hate Him because you are [[afraid]]. The gift that he has given you is more than anything that stands this side of Heaven. The instant for its recognition is at hand. Join your awareness to what has been already joined. The faith you give your brother can accomplish this. For he Who loves the world is seeing it for you, without one spot of sin upon it, and in the innocence that makes the sight of it as beautiful as Heaven.

###### T-21.III.10
Your faith in sacrifice has given it great power in your sight; except you do not realize you cannot see because of it. For sacrifice must be exacted of a body, and by another body. The mind could neither ask it nor receive it of itself. And no more could the body. The intention is in the mind, which tries to use the body to carry out the means for sin in which the mind believes. Thus is the joining of mind and body an inescapable belief of those who value sin. And so is sacrifice invariably a means for limitation, and thus for hate.

###### T-21.III.11
Think you the Holy Spirit is concerned with this? He gives not what it is His purpose to lead your _from_. You think He would [[deprivation|deprive]] you for your good. But "good" and "deprivation" are opposites, and cannot meaningfully join in any way. It is like saying that the moon and sun are one because they come with night and day, and so they must be joined. Yet sight of one is but the sign the other has disappeared from sight. Nor is it possible that what gives light be one with what depends on darkness to be seen. Neither demands the sacrifice of the other. Yet on the absence of the other does each depend.

###### T-21.III.12
The body was made to be a sacrifice to sin, and in the darkness so it still is seen. Yet in the light of vision it is looked upon quite differently. You can have faith in it to serve the Holy Spirit's goal, and give it power to serve as means to help the blind to see. But in their seeing they look past it, as do you. The faith and the belief you gave it belongs beyond. You gave perception and belief and faith from mind to body. Let them now be given back to what produced them, and can use them still to save itself from what it made.


***
##### Previous & Next
==&#8592 Previous Section== [[T-21.II. The Responsibility for Sight]]
==&#8594 Next Section &#8594== [[T-21.IV. The Fear to Look Within]]
